For this exercise, you are asked to convert the dataset to longitudinal level,
but only select the last encounter for each patient.
We were given a dataset,
but we need to determine the level before transforming it.
For determining the level,
I need to determine if the dataset is at the line or encounter level.
From looking at the sample,
it seems like it's at the encounter level.
However to confirm, I just want to run a few test.
I've run two tests.
For line, I check if total number of
rows is greater than the number of unique encounters.
For the encounter level,
I check if the total number of rows is equal to the number of unique encounters.
These tests confirm my initial assumption that it is at the encounter level.
So here is where I implement these tests and as you can see,
my assumption was correct,
the dataset is at the encounter level.
So now let's move on to the actual data transformation part.
In many cases, you may only want a snapshot of
a patient's history for your model and objective and in this case,
we only want the last encounter for each patient.
Please note that the encounter ID numbers are in order.
So that's a piece of info that helps us to order the encounters.
So if we look here at these two functions,
the first function converts the encounter ID to a number,
as the name implies.
It just takes a string ID and pulls the number from
it so we can use it to order the encounters for each patient.
The second function first sorts the values by
this newly created field and then groups and selects the last value.
For the final step,
I wanted to do some validation with
some test cases and we'll move to that step in a moment,
but here is the actual transformation and then here is a subset
of just a few fields to test my transformation.
For testing, I take three test cases and check if the last encounter is selected.
So just to go over one example,
I took patient 418 here and if you scroll through the possible encounters,
there are just three encounters.
You can see that 3362 is the highest number encounter and what you
would expect to be selected in
the transform dataset and then if you take our transformed data set,
you can see that this was selected.
So if we put patient ID 418,
you can see that the only encounter you see in the transform dataset is 3362.
Hopefully this illustrates the importance of having
some test cases and validating your work.
People make mistakes and it's good to have checks and
balances to make sure that the data is transformed right.
Now that you have done this exercise,
you should feel comfortable transforming
a dataset from the line level to the encounter level,
and also from the encounter level to the longitudinal level.